# Answers to Problem Set IV

*Prepared by*
Christian Y. Cahig

# Problem I

Find the solution to the following differential equation:

$$
\left(
D^{3} - D
\right)
y
=
4 e^{-x} + 3 e^{2x}
$$ (1.0)

Neglecting the right-hand side of (1.0)
gives a homogeneous ODE
whose characteristic equation (in $\lambda$) is
$\lambda^{3} - \lambda = 0$&mdash;that is,
the characteristic roots are
$-1,0,1$.
Hence, the homogeneous solution is the superposition of basis functions
$e^{-x}$, $e^{0x}$, and $e^{x}$:

$$
y_{\textsf{h}}
=
C_{1} e^{-x} + C_{2} e^{0x} + C_{3} e^{x}
=
C_{1} e^{-x} + C_{2} + C_{3} e^{x}
$$ (1.1)
where $C_{1}$, $C_{2}$, and $C_{3}$ are constants.

Inspecting the right-hand side of (1.0),
we can deduce that
$e^{-x}$ and $e^{2x}$
also are basis functions for the general solution.
However, $e^{-x}$ is already "subscribed" to $y_{\textsf{h}}$,
and must therefore be treated as a "repeating" basis.
The particular solution is then the superposition of basis functions
$x e^{-x}$ and $e^{2x}$:

$$
y_{\textsf{p}}
=
C_{4} x e^{-x}
+
C_{5} e^{2x}
$$
where $C_{4}$ and $C_{5}$ are constants.
Differentiating $y_{\textsf{p}}$
successively with respect to $x$,

$$
D y_{\textsf{p}} = y_{\textsf{p}}^{\prime}
=
C_{4} e^{-x} - C_{4} x e^{-x} + 2 C_{5} e^{2x}
$$
$$
D^{3} y_{\textsf{p}} = y_{\textsf{p}}^{\prime \prime \prime}
=
3 C_{4} e^{-x} - C_{4} x e^{-x} + 8 C_{5} e^{2x}
$$
and substituting onto (1.0) will eventually give

$$
2 C_{4} e^{-x} + 6 C_{5} e^{2x}
=
4 e^{-x} + 3 e^{2x}
\quad \Longrightarrow \quad
C_{4} = 2, \quad C_{5} = 0.5
$$
Hence, the particular solution is

$$
y_{\textsf{p}} = 2 x e^{-x} + 0.5 e^{2x}
$$ (1.2)

Therefore, the general solution to (1.0)
is the superposition of
$y_{\textsf{h}}$ and $y_{\textsf{p}}$:

$$
y
=
y_{\textsf{h}} + y_{\textsf{p}}
=
C_{1} e^{-x} + C_{2} + C_{3} e^{x}
+
2 x e^{-x} + 0.5 e^{2x}
$$ (1.3)
where $C_{1}$, $C_{2}$, and $C_{3}$ are constants.

# Problem II

Find the solution to the following differential equation:

$$
\left(
D^{3} - 2 D^{2} + D
\right)
y
=
x
$$ (2.0)

Neglecting the right-hand side of (2.0)
gives a homogeneous ODE
whose characteristic equation (in $\lambda$) is
$\lambda^{3} - 2 \lambda^{2} + \lambda = 0$&mdash;that is,
the characteristic roots are
$0$ and $1$,
the latter having a multiplicity of two.
Hence, the homogeneous solution is the superposition of basis functions
$e^{0x}$, $e^{x}$, and $x e^{x}$:

$$
y_{\textsf{h}}
=
C_{1} e^{0x} + C_{2} e^{x} + C_{3} x e^{x}
=
C_{1} + C_{2} e^{x} + C_{3} x e^{x}
$$ (2.1)
where $C_{1}$, $C_{2}$, and $C_{3}$ are constants.

Inspecting the right-hand side of (2.0),
we can deduce that the particular solution is of the form
$C_{4} x + C_{5}$,
where $C_{4}$ and $C_{5}$ are constants.
However, the constant function $C_{5}$ is already
"subscribed" to $y_{\textsf{h}}$,
and is essentially a "repeat" of the $C_{1}$ term.
The particular solution is then the superposition of basis functions
$x^{2}$ and $x$:

$$
y_{\textsf{p}}
=
C_{4} x^{2} + C_{5} x
$$
Differentiating $y_{\textsf{p}}$
successively with respect to $x$

$$
D y_{\textsf{p}} = y_{\textsf{p}}^{\prime}
=
2 C_{4} x + C_{5}
$$
$$
D^{2} y_{\textsf{p}} = y_{\textsf{p}}^{\prime \prime}
=
2 C_{4}
$$
$$
D^{3} y_{\textsf{p}} = y_{\textsf{p}}^{\prime \prime \prime}
=
0
$$
and substituting onto (2.0) will eventually give

$$
2 C_{4} x + C_{5} - 4 C_{4} = x
\quad \Longrightarrow \quad
C_{4} = 0.5, \quad C_{5} = 2
$$
Hence, the particular solution is

$$
y_{\textsf{p}} = 0.5 x^{2} + 2 x
$$ (2.2)

Therefore, the general solution to (2.0)
is the superposition of
$y_{\textsf{h}}$ and $y_{\textsf{p}}$:

$$
y
=
y_{\textsf{h}} + y_{\textsf{p}}
=
C_{1} + C_{2} e^{x} + C_{3} x e^{x}
+
0.5 x^{2} + 2 x
$$ (1.3)
where $C_{1}$, $C_{2}$, and $C_{3}$ are constants.

# Problem III

Find the solution to the following differential equation:

$$
\left(
D^{4} + 4 D^{2} + 4
\right)
y
=
- 20
$$ (3.0)

# Problem IV

A spring is such that
a 2-lb weight stretches it 6 in.
An impressed force of
$0.25 \sin 8t$
(lb)
and
a resisting force numerically equal to
the velocity at any instant
are both acting on the spring.
The weight starts 3 in below equilibrium point
with an imparted upward velocity of
3 ft/s.
Find the equation of motion.

# Problem V

A coil of inductance 1 henry
and negligible resistance
is connected in series with
a capacitance of $10^{-6}$ farads
and
an EMF of $E$ volts.
Taking $Q = I = 0$ at time $t = 0$,
find the charge $Q$
and the current $I$
when $t = 0.001$ s
if
(a) $E = 100$ volts;
(b) $E = 100 \sin 500t$ volts;
and
(c) $E = 100 \sin 1000t$ volts.
